**A Brief History of Maize**

Maize (Zea mays ssp. mays), known in the United States as corn, is a
grass, along with other important crops such as rice, wheat, and barley.

Because of its distinctive morphology, the origins of maize and its
closest wild relatives were the subject of more than a century of
debate, but thanks to the confluence of evidence from both genetics and
archaeology we now know the broad brushstrokes of the evolution of maize
in the Americas.

Archaeological evidence shows people living in what is today SW Mexico,
began domesticating maize as early as 9000 years ago from a wild annual
grass known as teosinte (*Zea mays* ssp. *parviglumis*). Why people
domesticated maize remains poorly understood, and whether people
initially used the grains for flour or for popcorn, or perhaps the sweet
stems, is still unknown. In either case, domestication left maize
completely dependent on people for its spread and reproduction. Quickly
after domestication, early farmers moved maize with them and traded it
with other communities. Within 1500 years maize reached S. America, but
moved somewhat more slowly north, arriving in the US SW nearly 5000
years after domestication began. Although it is now a global staple,
maize was introduced to other continents only after European
colonization beginning in the early 16th century.

By the time of European colonization, Indigenous groups throughout the
Americas had bred and adapted maize to a wide variety of environments
and a vast number of cultural and culinary uses. Even today, traditional
maize farming practices continue over tens of millions of hectares of
farmland, playing an important role in local economies and food supplies
but also contributing to the continued evolution of maize.

**The Cultural and Culinary Importance of Maize**

Maize holds incredible cultural importance to many peoples. Here we
focus on a few examples. For many cultures in the Americas, maize
fulfills not just nutritional requirements, but also important
religious, spiritual, and ceremonial roles. For example, the central
protagonists in the Popul Vuh, the origin story of the K’iche and
Yucatec Mayans, are twins born from the god of maize from two types of
maize (white and yellow). Deities of maize, such as the Aztec gods
Centeotl and Chicomecoatl, were central to many societies. Maize was
served as sacred food and drink throughout the Americas -- in the Incan
empire, for example, ajha (chicha de jora) made from fermented maize was
often used as a ritual beverage.

Fueled by the agronomic ingenuity of indigenous farmers, maize evolved
to become a staple crop throughout the Americas. Of the many processing
techniques developed by indigenous groups, nixtamalization is of
particular importance. Nixtamalization of maize is a chemical process
where kernels are cooked in alkaline solutions of lime or wood ash to
allow for nutrients in maize to be more easily accessible. Agricultural
innovations also allowed maize to dominate food production systems, such
as the “three sisters” co-cropping method of farming, involving a
planting system of maize, beans, and squash. Regional selection for
specific traits reflecting cultivation techniques, environmental
differences, and cultural and culinary preferences have contributed to
the diversity we see in maize today. Examples include “palomero” maize
selected for popcorn production, “ancho” and “cacahuazintle” maize for
pozole soups, and “pepitilla” for tortilla masa.

With the introduction of improved modern maize varieties into Mexico,
the diversity of these culturally and culinarily significant traditional
varieties has eroded. However, smallholder farmers today still consider
traditional maize varieties to have relative benefits, especially women
farmers who readily acknowledge the importance of grain flavor and
cooking volume over yield. Today, contemporary farmers of traditional
maize varieties – the most marginalized participants in the broader
maize economy – nonetheless remain crucial to the selection and
maintenance of culturally and environmentally relevant maize diversity.

**Collection and Use of Maize Germplasm**

Continued maize breeding and research heavily utilize germplasm
collections of maize. Much of this material was collected during the
20th century as part of private and government initiatives, many
motivated by concerns of population growth rooted in eugenics ideology.
These trips extracted seed from indigenous communities, where maize had
been bred for millenia, and placed them in long-term *ex situ* germplasm
repositories. The International Maize and Wheat Improvement Center,
CIMMYT, which grew in part out of these programs, maintains an extensive
germplasm collection. Germplasm collections have directly contributed to
advances such as genetic transformation and continue to be used by
researchers and breeders today.

Geneticists leading many of these historical collection projects used
the term ‘race’ or ‘landrace’ to describe maize populations, arguing
that “the problem of races and their recognition is indeed almost the
same in *Zea Mays* [sic] as in mankind” (Anderson & Cutler 1942). The
idea of race as a biological category is unfounded and stems from a
[*history of scientific
racism*](https://nmaahc.si.edu/learn/talking-about-race/topics/historical-foundations-race).
In maize, as in humans, ‘race’ is a social construct; while maize
‘races’ often share some morphological features, this sharing is
imperfect and not representative of wider underlying genetic
similarities. We advocate instead using the term ‘traditional
varieties’.

Indigenous communities have historically not benefited from the use of
germplasm collections or the economic windfalls of modern maize
production. To combat extractive research practices and the denial of
Indigenous data rights, we recommend the [*CARE Principles for
Indigenous Data
Governance*](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41559-023-02161-2), which
presents guidelines for protecting Indigenous data rights in current and
future scientific research. Another important avenue to address historic
and ongoing extractive scientific practices is seed rematriation
efforts, where seeds are returned to the original community from which
they were collected. Ongoing efforts, including at CIMMYT, recognize the
integral role of rematriation in building a more integrative,
collaborative, and respectful partnership with the communities who
maintain agricultural biodiversity.

**Bibliography**

***Websites***

[*Sustaining Lifeways and Anishinaabe Partners*](https://graham.umich.edu/news/sustaining-lifeways-and-anishinaabe-partners)

[*Rockefeller Philanthropy and Population-Related
Fields*](https://resource.rockarch.org/story/rockefeller-philanthropy-and-population-related-fields/)

[*The Rockefeller Foundation’s Mexican Agriculture Program,
1943-1965*](https://resource.rockarch.org/story/the-rockefeller-foundations-mexican-agriculture-program-1943-1965/)

[*CIMMYT - Our History*](https://www.cimmyt.org/about/our-history/)

[*CIMMYT - What is
nixtamalization?*](https://www.cimmyt.org/news/what-is-nixtamalization/)

[*CIMMYT recognized for support in restoring Guatemalan seed systems
after
hurricane*](https://www.cimmyt.org/news/cimmyt-recognized-for-support-in-restoring-guatemalan-seed-systems-after-hurricane/)

[*Biographical Memoir, Elvin Charles
Stakman*](https://nap.nationalacademies.org/read/2037/chapter/16)

[*About the Races of Maize
Collection*](https://www.ars.usda.gov/midwest-area/ames/plant-introduction-research/home/races-of-maize-permissions)

[*Searching for the Origins of Maize in Latin America,
1957-1981*](https://profiles.nlm.nih.gov/spotlight/ll/feature/origins)

[*Maize Moving
Figure*](https://figshare.com/articles/figure/Maize_Moving/12781307)

[*The Teacher-Friendly Guide to the Evolution of
Maize*](https://maize.teacherfriendlyguide.org/index.php/what-is-maize/cultural-uses-of-maize)

[*Corn Tastes Better on the Honor System, Robin Wall
Kimmerer*](https://emergencemagazine.org/feature/corn-tastes-better/)

[*Maize: The most important crop for The Mayan
Culture*](https://flaar-mesoamerica.org/2020/08/10/maize-the-most-important-crop-for-the-mayan-culture/)

[*Creation Story of the
Maya*](https://maya.nmai.si.edu/the-maya/creation-story-maya)

[*The Three Sisters of Indigenous American
Agriculture*](https://www.nal.usda.gov/collections/stories/three-sisters#:~:text=To%20the%20Iroquois%20people%2C%20corn,agriculture%20to%20the%20Iroquois%20nations)

[*Seed Rematriation*](https://sierraseeds.org/seed-rematriation/)

***Academic articles and books***

Anderson, E., & Cutler, H. C. (1942). Races of Zea mays: I. Their
recognition and classification. *Annals of the Missouri Botanical
Garden*, *29*(2), 69-88.

Bellon, M. R., Mastretta-Yanes, A., Ponce-Mendoza, A., Ortiz-Santamaría,
D., Oliveros-Galindo, O., Perales, H., ... & Sarukhán, J. (2018).
Evolutionary and food supply implications of ongoing maize domestication
by Mexican campesinos. *Proceedings of the Royal Society B*,
*285*(1885), 20181049.

Casañas, F., Simó, J., Casals, J., & Prohens, J. (2017). Toward an
evolved concept of landrace. *Frontiers in plant science*, *8*, 145.

Curry, H. A. (2021). Taxonomy, race science, and Mexican maize. *Isis*,
*112*(1), 1-21.

Eddens, A. (2019). White science and indigenous maize: The racial logics
of the green revolution. *The Journal of Peasant Studies*, *46*(3),
653-673.

Hellin, J., Keleman, A., & Bellon, M. (2010). Maize diversity and
gender: research from Mexico. *Gender & Development*, *18*(3), 427-437.

Kausch, A. P., Wang, K., Kaeppler, H. F., & Gordon-Kamm, W. (2021).
Maize transformation: history, progress, and perspectives. *Molecular
Breeding*, *41*, 1-36.

Matsuoka, Y., Vigouroux, Y., Goodman, M. M., Sanchez G, J., Buckler, E.,
& Doebley, J. (2002). A single domestication for maize shown by
multilocus microsatellite genotyping. *Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences*, *99*(9), 6080-6084.

Ocampo-Giraldo, V., Camacho-Villa, C., Costich, D. E., Vidal Martínez,
V. A., Smale, M., & Jamora, N. (2020). Dynamic conservation of genetic
resources: Rematriation of the maize landrace Jala. *Food Security*,
*12*, 945-958.

Piperno, D. R., Ranere, A. J., Holst, I., Iriarte, J., & Dickau, R.
(2009). Starch grain and phytolith evidence for early ninth millennium
BP maize from the Central Balsas River Valley, Mexico. *Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences*, *106*(13), 5019-5024.

Staller, J., Tykot, R., & Benz, B. (Eds.). (2006). *Histories of maize:
multidisciplinary approaches to the prehistory, linguistics,
biogeography, domestication, and evolution of maize*. Left Coast Press.

Willcox, M. C., Castillo-Gonzalez, F., Aragón-Cuevas, F., & Garcia, F.
H. C. (2019). Native maize in Mexico: Participatory breeding and
connections to culinary markets. In *Farmers and Plant Breeding* (pp.
80-90). Routledge.
